Geopy-1400 (#9)
MiraGeoscience/curve-apps: docs/source/edge_detection.rst

.. _edge_detection:

Edge Detection
==============

With this application, users can create lines along edges (lineaments)
from gridded data in a semi-automated fashion. The application uses
machine vision algorithms from the
`Scikit-Image <https://scikit-image.org/>`__ open-source package. Edges are exported to `Geoscience ANALYST <https://mirageoscience.com/mining-industry-software/geoscience-analyst/>`__
for viewing and editing.

.. figure:: ./images/edge_detection/edge_detection_landing.png
            :align: center
            :width: 100%

> New user? Visit the `Getting Started <getting_started>`_ page.

Reviewer: Link is broken

Author: These won't work until we are fully build

Application
-----------

The following sections provide details on the different parameters exposed in the user-interface (``edge_detection.ui.json``).

.. figure:: ./images/edge_detection/edge_detection_ui.png
            :align: center
            :width: 300

Data Selection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

 - **Object**: Select the target ``Grid2D`` object from the dropdown list.
 - **Data**: Select the data attribute to use for edge detection.

Detection Parameters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

`Scikit-Image.feature.Canny <https://scikit-image.org/docs/dev/auto_examples/edges/plot_canny.html#sphx-glr-auto-examples-edges-plot-canny-py>`__
 - **Sigma**: Standard deviation of the Gaussian filter used to smooth the input data. Increase the parameter to detect fewer edges in noisy data.

`Scikit-Image.transform.probabilistic_hough_line <https://scikit-image.org/docs/dev/api/skimage.transform.html#probabilistic-hough-line>`__
 - **Line length**: Filter for the minimum length (pixels) of detected lines. Increase the parameter to extract longer lines.
 - **Line gap**: Maximum gap between pixels to still form a line.

>     Increase the parameter to create the number of segments that can be detected from disconnected edges.

Reviewer: I find this confusing.  Took a stab at clearing it up, but will defer to you.

 - **Threshold**: Threshold parameter used in the Hough Line Transform.

**[Optionals]**

 - **Window size**: Size of the square window used to sub-divide the grid for processing. By default, the window size
    is set to the shortest side of the input grid. Smaller window sizes can be used to speed up computations but may result in
    more fragmented lines. Larger window sizes can be used to improve line continuity but may slow down computations.
 - **Merge length**: Merge lines within a specified distance (in meters) of each other. This parameter is useful for

>     merging fragmented lines that are close to each other but not connected.

Author: Line gap is a detection parameter on pixels, this one merges the resulting vertices to reduce complexity. I re-worded a bit.

Output Preferences
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

 - **Save as**: Assign a specific name to the resulting ``Curve`` object.
 - **Group**: Create a ``Container Group`` entity to store the results.

.. _edge_methodology:

Methodology
-----------

> The conversion from raster data to lines involves the following four

Author: I get your point. Curves is the final product, made up of many "segments".

main processing steps.

.. figure:: ./images/edge_detection/edge_detection_algo.png
            :align: center
            :width: 500

1. The selected gridded data are normalized between [0, 1]

2. Normalized values are processed with the
   `Canny <#Canny-Edge-Parameters>`__ detection algorithm to extract a binary edge map.

3. The full grid is sub-divided into overlapping **square tiles** defined by
   the `window size <#Window-size>`__ parameter. Tiling is used to speed
   up computations but to also avoid skewing the detection of lines along the longest axis of the input grid.

4. For each tile, edges are converted to a line parametric form using
   the `Hough Line Transform <#Hough-Line-Parameters>`__.

[Optional] The resulting vertices defining the segments can be filtered to reduce the number of unique lines. Collocated

> vertices are merged if they are within a specified distance of each other. This is controlled by the `merge length <#Merge-Length>`__ parameter.

Reviewer: link didn't work

Author: Fixed

The final output is a ``Curve`` object containing the detected lineaments.
The orientation of the lines, in absolute degree from North [0, 90], and line length are stored as attributes of the ``Curve`` object.

Example
-------

> This section demonstrates the effect of various detection parameters on a training grid provided `here <https://github.com/MiraGeoscience/curve-apps/tree/main/edge_detection-assets>`__.

Author: I would rather not to have to edit those paths again. We can have them broken at first

            :align: center
            :width: 300

Sigma
^^^^^

The following figure shows the effect of increasing the ``sigma`` parameter in the Canny edge detection algorithm. For ``sigma=3`` we obtain:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 25
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Canny edges
     - Hough Lines

   * - .. figure:: ./images/edge_detection/example_canny_sigma3.png
            :align: center
            :width: 300
     - .. figure:: ./images/edge_detection/example_result_sigma3.png
            :align: center
            :width: 300

Note that fewer small edges were recovered by the Canny algorithm, resulting in fewer lines in the final output.

Line Length
^^^^^^^^^^^

Next, we explore the effect of increasing the ``line length`` parameter in the Hough Line Transform. For ``line length=24`` we obtain:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 25
   :header-rows: 1

   * - With 12 pixels line length
     - With 24 pixels line length

   * - .. figure:: ./images/edge_detection/example_result_default.png
            :align: center
            :width: 300
     - .. figure:: ./images/edge_detection/example_result_line24.png
            :align: center
            :width: 300

> Note that longer lines are extracted when increasing the ``line length`` parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that shorter lines are filtered when increasing the ``line length`` parameter.
```

Line Gap
^^^^^^^^

> The following figure shows the effect of increasing the ``line gap`` parameter in the Hough Line Transform. For ``line gap=10`` we obtain:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following figure shows the effect of increasing the ``line gap`` parameter in the Hough Line Transform. For ``line gap=1`` and ``line gap=10`` we obtain:
```

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 25
   :header-rows: 1

   * - With 1 pixels line gap
     - With 4 pixels line gap

   * - .. figure:: ./images/edge_detection/example_result_default.png
            :align: center
            :width: 300
     - .. figure:: ./images/edge_detection/example_result_gap4.png
            :align: center
            :width: 300

Note that increasing the ``line gap`` parameter results in increasing the number of detected lines.

Threshold
^^^^^^^^^

To demonstrate the effect of the ``threshold`` parameter, we will change the detection parameters to increase the number small segments.
The table below presents the parameters and comparative results for ``threshold=1`` and ``threshold=8``.

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 25 25
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Detection parameters
     - With ``threshold=1``
     - With ``threshold=8``

>    * - .. figure:: ./images/edge_detection/edge_detection_threshold.png

Reviewer: Maybe put the parameters image above to give the side-by-side more space (hard to see).

Author: Done
